(GH-9521) Add `about_PSItem` article (#9528)
MicrosoftDocs/PowerShell-Docs: reference/5.1/Microsoft.PowerShell.Core/About/about_PSItem.md

---
description: The automatic variable that contains the current object in the pipeline object.
Locale: en-US
ms.date: 12/05/2022
online version: https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/module/microsoft.powershell.core/about/about_psitem?view=powershell-7.3&WT.mc_id=ps-gethelp
schema: 2.0.0
title: about PSItem
---
# about_PSItem

## Short description

The automatic variable that contains the current object in the pipeline object.

## Long description

> PowerShell includes the `$PSItem` variable and its alias, `$_`, as
> [automatic variables][01] in scriptblocks that process pipeline objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PowerShell includes the `$PSItem` variable and its alias, `$_`, as
[automatic variables][01] in scriptblocks that process pipeline objects. This
article uses `$PSItem` in the examples, but `$PSItem` can be replaced with `$_`
in every example.
```

You can use this variable in commands that perform an action on every object or

> on selected objects in a pipeline.

Reviewer: Is this sentence needed? I am not sure what value it adds and I am not crazy about the structure.

Author: Happy to strike this.

There are a few common use cases for `$PSItem`:

> - in the **Process** parameter of the `ForEach-Object`cmdlet
> - in the **FilterScript** parameter of the `Where-Object` cmdlet
> - in the intrinsic methods **ForEach** and **Where**
> - with delay-bind scriptblock parameters
> - in a `switch` statement's conditional scriptblocks
> - in the `process` block of a function
> - in a `filter` definition
> - in the substitution operand scriptblock of the `-replace` operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- in the scriptblock for the **Process** parameter of the `ForEach-Object`cmdlet
- in the scriptblock for the **FilterScript** parameter of the `Where-Object` cmdlet
- in the intrinsic methods **ForEach** and **Where**
- with delay-bind scriptblock parameters
- in a `switch` statement's conditional values and associated scriptblocks
- in the `process` block of a function
- in a `filter` definition
- in the substitution operand scriptblock of the `-replace` operator
```

The rest of this article includes examples of using `$PSItem` for these use
cases.

## ForEach-Object Process

The [ForEach-Object][02] cmdlet is designed to operate
on objects in the pipeline, executing the **Process** parameter's scriptblock
once for every object in the pipeline.

You can use `$PSItem` in the **Process** parameter's scriptblock but not in the
**Begin** or **End** parameter scriptblocks. If you reference `$PSItem` in the
**Begin** or **End** parameter scriptblocks, the value is `$null` because those
scriptblocks don't operate on each object in the pipeline.

```powershell
$parameters = @{
    Begin   = { Write-Host "PSItem in Begin is: $PSItem" }
    Process = {
        Write-Host "PSItem in Process is: $PSItem"
        $PSItem + 1
    }
    End     = { Write-Host "PSItem in End is: $PSItem" }
}

$result = 1, 2, 3 | ForEach-Object @parameters

Write-Host "Result is: $result"
```

```output
PSItem in Begin is:
PSItem in Process is: 1
PSItem in Process is: 2
PSItem in Process is: 3
PSItem in End is:
Result is: 2 3 4
```

## Where-Object FilterScript

The [Where-Object][03] cmdlet is designed to filter objects in the pipeline.

> You can use `$PSItem` in the **FilterScript** parameter, which executes once

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use `$PSItem` in the scriptblock of the **FilterScript** parameter, which executes once
```

for each input object in the pipeline.

```powershell
1, 2, 3 | Where-Object -FilterScript { ($PSItem % 2) -eq $true }
```

```output
2
```

> The **FilterScript** checks to see if the current object is even and filters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the **FilterScript** checks to see if the current object is even and filters
```

out any odd values, returning only `2` from the original list.

## ForEach and Where methods

Both the [ForEach][04] and [Where][05] intrinsic methods for arrays take a
scriptblock as an input parameter. You can use the `$PSItem` in those
scriptblocks to access the current object.

```powershell

> @(1, 2, 3).ForEach({ $PSItem + 1 }).Where({ ($PSItem % 2) -eq $true })

Reviewer: This example is confusing. Is the value `3` the incremented value or the original value of `$PSItem`? Can we come up with a better example?

```

```output
3
```

The scriptblock of the **ForEach** method increments the value of the current
object by one. Then the scriptblock of the **Where** method checks whether the

> current object is even and filters out any odd numbers.

Reviewer: Is it filtering `in` or `out`? Better to describe the reason for the result.

## Delay-bind scriptblock parameters

[Delay-bind scriptblocks][06] let you use `$PSItem` to define parameters for a
pipelined cmdlet before executing it.

```powershell
dir config.log | Rename-Item -NewName { "old_$($_.Name)" }
```

## Switch statement scriptblocks

In [switch statements][07], you can use `$PSItem` in both action scriptblocks
and statement condition scriptblocks.

```powershell
$numbers = 1, 2, 3

switch ($numbers) {
    { ($PSItem % 2) -eq 0 } { "$PSItem is even" }
    default { "$PSItem is odd" }
}
```

```output
1 is odd
2 is even
3 is odd
```

> The statement condition scriptblock checks whether the current object is even.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the statement condition scriptblock checks whether the current object is even.
```

If it is, the associated action scriptblock outputs a message indicating the
current object is even.

The action scriptblock for the `default` condition outputs a message indicating
the current object is odd.

## Function process blocks

When you define a [function][08], you can use `$PSItem` in the `process` block
definition but not in the `begin` or `end` block definitions. If you
reference `$PSItem` in the `begin` or `end` blocks, the value is `$null`
because those blocks don't operate on each object in the pipeline.

When you use `$PSItem` in the `process` block definition, the value is the
value is the current object if the function is called in the pipeline and
otherwise `$null`.

```powershell
function Add-One {
    process { $PSItem + 1 }
}

1, 2, 3 | Add-One
```

```output
2
3
4
```

> [!TIP]
> While you can use `$PSItem` in [advanced functions][09], there's little

> > reason to do so. If your function is intended to input from the pipeline,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> reason to do so. If you intend to receive input from the pipeline,
```

> it's best to define parameters with one of the `ValueFromPipeline*` arguments
> for the [Parameter][10] attribute.
>
> Using that functionality and the parameter binding for advanced functions
> makes the implementation more explicit and predictable than processing the
> current object to get the required values.
>
> One good use of `$PSItem` in advanced functions is to inspect the current
> object itself for debugging or logging when the function has multiple

> > parameters that take input from the pipeline.

Reviewer: Should we show an example?

Author: Added an example. I don't _love_ it, but I think it's clear.

        Write-Host "PSItem in Process is: $PSItem"
        $PSItem + 1
    }
    End     = { Write-Host "PSItem in End is: $PSItem" }
}

$result = 1, 2, 3 | ForEach-Object @parameters

Write-Host "Result is: $result"
```

```output
PSItem in Begin is:
PSItem in Process is: 1
PSItem in Process is: 2
PSItem in Process is: 3
PSItem in End is:
Result is: 2 3 4
```

## Where-Object FilterScript

The [Where-Object][03] cmdlet is designed to filter objects in the pipeline.

You can use `$PSItem` in the scriptblock of the **FilterScript** parameter,
which executes once for each input object in the pipeline.

```powershell
1, 2, 3 | Where-Object -FilterScript { ($PSItem % 2) -eq $true }
```

```output
2
```

In this example, the **FilterScript** checks to see if the current object is
even, filters out any odd values, and returns only `2` from the original list.

## ForEach and Where methods

Both the [ForEach][04] and [Where][05] intrinsic methods for arrays take a
scriptblock as an input parameter. You can use the `$PSItem` in those
scriptblocks to access the current object.

```powershell
@('a', 'b', 'c').ForEach({ $PSItem.ToUpper() }).Where({ $PSItem -ceq 'B' })
```

```output

> 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
B
```
